This file describes how to prepare your data for the HMSC-course in Helsinki on November 2-6 2020.

Given that we have a large number of participants, we highly encourage you to send your data to us beforehand.
This allows us to ensure that your data are in a shape that is ready for HMSC-analyses, including our plan of
fitting a pilot HMSC-model to your data already before the course. Note that this is not done for the purpose
of addressing your actual research questions (which we don't know), just to ensure that your data are technically
ready to go. We will of course treat your data fully confidentially and not share it outside those course instructors who
will take part in setting up the pilot model. For more information on this, see the end of the README.txt.

There is no deadline for sending the data, but the earlier you send it, the more sure it is that
we will have time to set up the pilot model for it. We will work with the data in the order of their arrival.
We will automatize the processing of a large number of datasets as much as possible, so
it is important that you follow these instructions as completely as possible. In particular, your data needs
to be in a specific format, and it needs to pass some consistency checks before we start working with it!

Send the datafiles by email (as attachments) to hmsc-course@helsinki.fi
with email subject data_surname_firstname, e.g. data_ovaskainen_otso
Send all the data in one email.

If you have questions before sending the data, please email your question to
hmsc-course@helsinki.fi with email subject question_surname_firstname,
e.g. question_ovaskainen_otso 

If your name has non-standard characters or the names have several parts, please simplify it
 so that surname_firstname has no non-standard characters and there is only one surname and 
one firstname (we will create for you a folder named surname_firstname).

We encourage you to send the full dataset, as that will enable the fastest transition from
pilot analyses to actual analyses. If the data are big, we will
extract a randomly selected subset to avoid computational problems when fitting the model.
However, if you wish, you can send also just a subset of the data.

The files that you need to prepare are:

SXY.csv (mandatory)
README.text (mandatory)
S1_read_data.R (mandatory)
TP.csv (optional)
P.tre (optional)

For the format and contents of these files, see the examples provided,
in particular the R-script S1_read_data.R . You will need to modify this file
so that it reads in your own data and makes some basic consistency checks.
The example files correspond to the bird example that is given in
Chapter 11 of the book Ovaskainen and Abrego 2020.

We expect that most datasets are possible to convert to this format.
If your data cannot be converted to this format, please email 
hmsc-course@helsinki.fi with email subject question_surname_firstname
and explain the issue.

Some examples that will require other kinds of formatting include:
-spatial random effects where the relevant distance is not euclidian.
-cases where a phylogenetic tree or taxonomy table is not available but a phylogenetic correlation matrix is available.
